

CHAPTER 1
Why Filipinos Consider Rizal a National Hero
Why Nations Have Heroes
Every country has its heroes. At one point in time these heroes played a crucial role in the history of their country. Heroes can be mythical or legendary. The best ones are those who helped form the country like China's Pan Ku or Korea's Danggun Wagaeon. The ones that can be emulated by humans are those who have been responsible for inspiring the people to fight for their freedom such as Benjamin Franklin and Thomas Paine in the United States or Francois-Marie Arouet de Voltaire in France or were actually involved in the struggle such as George Washington, India's Mohandas Gandhi and Vietnam's Ho Chi Minh. By doing so they merit the admiration of their countrymen and are considered worthy of emulation. They have become a source of inspiration and public worship. In time they become national icons.
Having heroes is important in the history of every country. They demonstrate the best of what a person can be. Those persons placed the welfare of their countrymen above their own and they work for the general good. A true hero developed and manifested strong conviction which aimed to save his country from severe challenges. He lived by this conviction even at the risk and at the cost of losing his life. A hero is never self-seeking or seeks rewards for his heroism. Most individuals who were considered heroes preferred humility and anonymity. It is the people who seek them and call them as heroes.
It is important to study what makes a hero. Only through a critical understanding of what heroes are we will avoid the trap of blind adoration. Blind adoration is shorn of historical meaning. Understanding heroes by putting them in the proper historical perspective on the other hand, gives value to the public worship accorded to them. By looking at our heroes through the context of our country's history, we properly owe our debt of gratitude to them and appreciate their role in the building of the nation-state.
The Humanity of Heroes
In studying the life of heroes, it is necessary to remember that every hero is a human being. Heroes are made and no one was born as a hero. Heroes, like any ordinary human being, is a product of his time. He is also the product of his environment which includes his society, his surroundings and the conditions happening at his time. Heroes are made because they responded to the call of the times and their response to this call had a decisive effect on the lives of their countrymen.
Heroes are not born as saints and many of them were not exactly saintly. Heroes are actually ordinary human beings who faced challenges with an extraordinary response. Putting superhuman and supernatural attributes to heroes creates a mysticism which is unreal. In the end, their humanity will be unveiled through scholarly study.


By closely studying the humanity of heroes, some of their frailties might surface. Some writers may wish to denigrate their achievements by capitalizing on these frailties. Their motives may even be questioned by making malicious conclusions about their achievements. These frailties should not distract a serious student from studying the life of the hero. On the other hand, the student should be guided on the contribution of the hero to the betterment of his country rather than on his shortcomings. It is also important to consider how the hero's achievement outweighed his deficiencies in serving the nation.
The Criteria for Heroes.
Who declares if anyone is a hero? How did Rizal become a hero?
There is no law or official proclamation which directly made Rizal into a hero. Rizal's hero status was made by the acclamation of the Filipino people. This means through the hero's achievements and example, the people considered the person as an admirable exemplar who should be emulated. The person becomes the object of public worship and accolades are heaped upon him. This could be seen in the singular tributes in his honor and it may be manifested physically through the erection of monuments and the naming of streets and buildings after him. The test of a person's heroism becomes stronger if the person is acclaimed long after his death and by people who are not of his generation. This means the appreciation of his life and achievements goes beyond his lifetime.
No one becomes a hero overnight. One might be recognized for his acts of heroism but that does not exactly make him a hero. Persons like these are easily forgotten and their acts dismissed as knee-jerk reactions or even accidental. Veneration to their heroism is often shallow. To be considered a hero his life and achievements need to be studied carefully. A passage of time is necessary to allow a dispassionate and objective study of his life, achievements and times. This would allow people to reflect on the hero's life and achievements and his overall effect on the country's history. The National Historical Institute, (now the National Historical Commission of the Philippines) the country's agency in charge of historical matters, prescribes the passage of fifty years before a person is finally confirmed as a hero. If the person is still being admired after the passage of that period and his ideas and ideals are still invoked and appreciated, then that person has passed the test of time and is considered a true hero.
The Definition of a Hero
The National Historical Institute laid down the definition of a hero. In 1965 its predecessor office, the National Heroes Commission released a criteria on the definition of a national hero. It was approved by a committee headed by Director Carlos Quirino of the National Library. According to the definition, a hero was
"an admirable leader towering over his peers, who serves a noble cause, determinative influence over the spiritual life of his people in a particular remarkable possessing exceptional talent, distinguished valor and/or hold enterprise, exercising a
event."